Internet standards are developed by Internet engineering task force, their standard documents are called requests for comments. Internet can be seen as infrastructure that provides services to application. Internet API are used by applications to send data to other hosts over the network.

Open system is the one connected to network and ready for communication while closed system is not connected and not available for communication.

Physical medium : which actually carry signals
	guided media : cables
	unguided media : wireless, satelites.

Baseband vs BroadBand :
	baseband : entire bandwidth is consumed by single signal.
	BroadBand : signals are sent on multiple frequencies.
Transmission :
	store and forward, the packet switches may store packets till it recieves all of them and then forward them.
	if the network is conjusted, packets are saved in output buffer and this is called queue delay due to buffer. If buffer is full, incoming packets are lost.

	circuit switching networks:
	resources needed along the path are reserved while in packet switched network they aren't reserved. telephones use circuit switching, before th e call is made circuit is reserved. due to this guranteed constat rate is achieved for transfers.

Encapsulation :
	all nodes dont use all of OSI layers. source and destination use all 7 layers, link-layer switches use only the bottom two layers, while routers use bottom 3 layers.

	an application-layer message is passed to the transport layer.the transport layer takes the message and appends additional information (transport-layer header information)that will be used by the receiver-side transport layer. The application-layer message and the transport-layer header information together constitute the transport-layer segment. 
	The transport-layer segment thus encapsulates the application-layer message. The added information might include information allowing the receiver-side transport layer to deliver the message up to the appropriate application, and error-detection bits that allow the receiver to determine whether bits in the message have been changed in route. The transport layer then passes the segment to the network layer, which adds network-layer header information such as source and destination end system addresses, creating a network-layer datagram. The datagram is then passed to the link layer, which will add its own link-layer header information and create a link-layer frame. Thus, we see that at each layer, a packet has two types of fields: header fields and a payload field. The payload is typically a packet from the layer above.




// Socket :
	The unique combination of IP address and Port number together are termed as Socket.

	its an interface between application layer and transport layer.
	to identify destination process we use ip address of host and port no (for process identification)

// Transport should provide:
	Reliable data transfer :
		guarantee that there will be no data loss.
	Throughput: 
		Bandwidth sensitive applications require that at least some throughput should be guaranteed (say x bit/sec) by transport layer.
	Timing : 
		max time to deliver packets.
	Security : 
		data can be encrypted before sending.

// Today's internet cant provide throughput and Timing guarantees.

// TCP : Transmission Control Protocol
	connection oriented and Reliable service.
	it makes sure all data in transfered to destination with no corruption and in-sequence
	also include a congestion control mechanism.
	it uses three way handshaking.

// SSL : Secure Socket Layer 
	its an enhancement to TCP. implemented as application layer. if one wants to use ssl he must include its code. ssl provide API similar to standard TCP. application writes data on ssl socket and it does encryption.

// UDP : User Datagram Protocol
	connectionless, unreliable service.
	messages may get lost, and may arrive out of order.
	no congestion control mechanism.

	client open a socket send msg through socket each packet has destination address and port no and reads data back from the socket (sent by server).  server reads data from socket and writes to it.	

// ARP : Address Resolution Protocol
	used to associate ip address to physical address. its used by host or router to know physical address of machine when ip is known. it sends ARP query with IP address.

	ARP is used by the Data Link Layer to identify the MAC address of the Receiver’s machine.

// RARP : Reverse Address Resolution Protocol
	it allows host to know ip address if it only knows its physical address. RARP has become obsolete since the time DHCP has come into picture.
// HTTP : Hypertext Transfer Protocol
	its application layer protocol. it defines how web clients request pages from server and how server transfer pages to clients. it uses TCP as underlying protocol.
	client http makes request to its socket and gets data from socket. server http recieve request from socket and writes data to socket. all internal transfer and reliability concerns are handled by TCP.

	its said to be stateless protocol, cause server doenst remember what it just did. if client again requests the same thing server will send it again, not knowing that it just sent it.

	there are two types of messages request and response.

// URL encoding : 
	url should have ASCII characters only so that it can be sent over network, but if url has non ASCII characters then they are encoded.  % followed by two hex digits are used for encoding.


// Persistent non-persistent connection:
	if a new tcp connection is made for each request then its non-persistent connection else its Persistent connection, since it maintains the connection.


// Cookie :
	when you visit a site for first time, server create unique id for you and saves it in database. it return the unique value to you as http response under cookie header. your browser saves that value in cookie file corresponding to that website. then all of packets for that site will contain Cookie no, from that no in packet server can identify you.

// Web cache (Proxy server) :
	it keeps copy of recently requested objects. A brower is configured so that all request go through Proxy server. it acts as destination and checks if it has that content if not it send request to original destination. it acts as both client and server.

	// conditional GET :	
		to ensure proxy server has updated copy of object http support conditional get request i.e. actual data is sent by server only if its been modified since the last time it was accessed.

// FTP: File Transfer Protocol
	uses two parallel connections while HTTP uses only one.
	one is control connection and other is data connection.
	http uses same connection for data and control information (id, password, commands) so its called in-band while FTP uses different connection so its called out-of-band sending.
	SMTP is also in-band.
	control connection is only one but it uses one connection for each file. i.e. data connection is not Persistent.
	HTTP is stateless but for FTP server must maintain state of each client to know its current directory.

// SMTP: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
	it transfer the mail from senders mail server to receipients mail server.
	senders use user-agent to send mail which sends mail to his mail server. it uses client side SMTP protocol to send mail from senders pc to senders mail server.the mail server transfers it to reciepients mail server using server side SMTP, reciever uses user-agent to fetch mail from server to his pc by using mail access protocol.

	it uses reliabile TCP protocol.
	it doesnt use intermediate mail servers i.e. direct tcp connection is made between senders and receipient. mail is not stored on intermediate server.

	http is pull ptotocol : reciepient creates connection, smtp is push senders create.
	
	smtp needs everything in 7bit ascii data so encoding may be required its not the case with http

	mail access protocol : POP3 (Post office protocol), IMAP (Internet mail access protocol) and http. these protocols are used to transfer mail from mail server to local pc.

	POP3 : uses TCP connection with mail server. it works in three phases authorization, transaction and update.
	does not allow creating remote folders and orgnizing mails into them.

	IMAP : mails are associated with folders, users can create folders and move mails on server. IMAP maintains this state information across sessions.

	HTTP : using browser access mails. data sending and recieving occurs through http. further transfers occurs through smtp.

// DNS : Domain Name System 

	There can be serveral ip address for one domain name. dns servers contains all of them and send them in shuffled order for each request for load balancing on ip.	
	it uses UDP connection.

	// DNS is destributed and not centralised because :

		it uses UDP protocol.
		to avoid single point of failure.
		traffic overload
		manage physical distance
		difficult to manage centralised.

		root dns servers : 13 distributed  across globe.
		top level domain servers : responsible for top level domains like com, net, org and country wise domains in, uk, au 
		authorative servers : specific to orgnization like amazon.

		local dns server (default name server) : client request to local dns in recursive manner (i.e. local dns makes further request to root, tld and authorative servers and return final result)

		the request from client to local server is recursive while further are iterative

		DNS cache : dns server cache the mapping recieved for further use, further requests for the same name are processed from the cache. since the mappings are not permanent the cache is deleted after some time (e.g. two days)

		// some sites work with www while other don't ?
			its because dns has entries for www.sitename.com and sitename.com, the www is just convention you can put anything there, like afafa.sitename.com and add entry in dns for this then site will work.

// Repeater : 
	operates at physical layer. if signal becomes weak, regenerates it.
 	An important point to be noted about repeaters is that they do no amplify the signal. When the signal becomes weak, they copy the signal bit by bit and regenerate it at the original strength. It is a 2 port device.

// Hub : 
	A hub is basically a multiport repeater. A hub connects multiple wires coming from different branches, for example, the connector in star topology which connects different stations. Hubs cannot filter data, so data packets are sent to all connected devices.  In other words, collision domain of all hosts connected through Hub remains one.  Also, they do not have intelligence to find out best path for data packets which leads to inefficiencies and wastage.

// Bridge : 
	A bridge operates at data link layer. A bridge is a repeater, with add on functionality of filtering content by reading the MAC addresses of source and destination. It is also used for interconnecting two LANs working on the same protocol. It has a single input and single output port, thus making it a 2 port device.

// Switch : 
	A switch is a multi port bridge with a buffer and a design that can boost its efficiency(large number of  ports imply less traffic) and performance. Switch is data link layer device. Switch can perform error checking before forwarding data, that makes it very efficient as it does not forward packets that have errors and  forward good packets selectively to correct port only.  In other words, switch divides collision domain of hosts, but broadcast domain remains same.

// Routers :
	A router is a device like a switch that routes data packets based on their IP addresses. Router is mainly a Network Layer device. Routers normally connect LANs and WANs together and have a dynamically updating routing table based on which they make decisions on routing the data packets. Router divide broadcast domains of hosts connected through it.

// Gateway :
	A gateway, as the name suggests, is a passage to connect two networks together that may work upon different networking models. They basically works as the messenger agents that take data from one system, interpret it, and transfer it to another system. Gateways are also called protocol converters and can operate at any network layer. Gateways are generally more complex than switch or router.
